(music and voices incelebration)
Make way for the Duke!
Stand back!
Proceed, Solinus, toprocure my fall
And by the doom of deathend woes and all.
(drumming)
Merchant of Syracuse,plead no more;
I am not partial toinfringe our laws:
The enmity and discordwhich of late
Sprung from the rancorousoutrage of your duke
To merchants, ourwell-dealing countrymen,
Who wanting guilders toredeem their lives
Have seal'd his rigorousstatutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from ourthreatening looks.
For, since the mortal andintestine jars
'Twixt thy seditiouscountrymen and us,
It hath in solemn synodsbeen decreed
Both by the Syracusiansand ourselves,
To admit no traffic to ouradverse towns Nay, more,
If any born at Ephesus beseen
At any Syracusian martsand fairs;
Again: if any Syracusianborn
Come to the bay ofEphesus, he dies,
His goods confiscate tothe duke's dispose,
Unless a thousand marks belevied,
To quit the penalty and toransom him.
Thy substance, valued atthe highest rate,
Cannot amount unto ahundred marks;
Therefore by law thou artcondemned to die.
Yet this my comfort: whenyour words are done,
My woes end likewise withthe evening sun.
Well, Syracusian, say inbrief the cause
Why thou departed'st fromthy native home
And for what cause thoucamest to Ephesus.
A heavier task could nothave been imposed
Than I to speak my griefsunspeakable:
Yet, that the world maywitness that my end
Was wrought by nature, notby vile offence,
I'll utter what my sorrowsgive me leave.
In Syracusa was I born,and wed
Unto a woman, happy butfor me,
And by me, had not our hapbeen bad.
With her I lived in joy;our wealth increased
By prosperous voyages Ioften made
To Epidamnum; till myfactor's death
And the great care ofgoods at random left
Drew me from kindembracements of my spouse:
From whom my absence wasnot six months old
Before herself, almost atfainting under
The pleasing punishmentthat women bear,
Had made provision for herfollowing me
And soon and safe arrivedwhere I was.
There had she not beenlong, but she became
A joyful mother of twogoodly sons;
And, which was strange,the one so like the other,
As could not bedistinguish'd but by names.
That very hour, and in theself-same inn,
A meaner woman wasdelivered
Of such a burden, maletwins, both alike:
Those,--for their parentswere exceeding poor,--
I bought and brought up toattend my sons.
My wife, not meanly proudof two such boys,
Made daily motions for ourhome return:
Unwilling I agreed. Alas!too soon,
We came aboard.
A league from Epidamnumhad we sail'd,
Before the alwayswind-obeying deep
Gave any tragic instanceof our harm:
But longer did we notretain much hope;
For what obscured lightthe heavens did grant
Did but convey unto ourfearful minds
A doubtful warrant ofimmediate death;
Which though myself wouldgladly have embraced,
Yet the incessant weepingsof my wife,
Weeping before for whatshe saw must come,
And piteous plainings ofthe pretty babes,
That mourn'd for fashion,ignorant what to fear,
Forced me to seek delaysfor them and me.
And this it was, for othermeans was none:
The sailors sought forsafety by our boat,
And left the ship, thensinking-ripe, to us:
My wife, more careful forthe latter-born,
Had fasten'd him unto asmall spare mast,
Such as seafaring menprovide for storms;
To him one of the othertwins was bound,
Whilst I had been likeheedful of the other:
The children thusdisposed, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whomour care was fix'd,
Fasten'd ourselves ateither end the mast;
And floating straight,obedient to the stream,
Was carried towardsCorinth, as we thought.
At length the sun, gazingupon the earth,
Dispersed those vapoursthat offended us;
And by the benefit of hiswished light,
The seas wax'd calm, andwe discovered
Two ships from far makingamain to us,
Of Corinth that, ofEpidaurus this:
But ere they came,--O, letme say no more!
Gather the sequel by thatwent before.
Nay, forward, old man; donot break off so;
For we may pity, thoughnot pardon thee.
O, had the gods done so, Ihad not now
Worthily term'd themmerciless to us!
For, ere the ships couldmeet by twice five leagues,
We were encounterd by amighty rock;
Which being violentlyborne upon,
Our helpful ship wassplitted in the midst;
So that, in this unjustdivorce of us,
Fortune had left to bothof us alike
What to delight in, whatto sorrow for.
Her part, poor soul!seeming as burdened
With lesser weight but notwith lesser woe,
Was carried with morespeed before the wind;
And in our sight theythree were taken up
By fishermen of Corinth,as we thought.
At length, another shiphad seized on us;
And, knowing whom it wastheir hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome totheir shipwreck'd guests;
And would have reft thefishers of their prey,
Had not their bark beenvery slow of sail;
And therefore homeward didthey bend their course.
Thus have you heard mesever'd from my bliss;
That by misfortunes was mylife prolong'd,
To tell sad stories of myown mishaps.
And for the sake of themthou sorrowest for,
Do me the favour to dilateat full
What hath befall'n of themand thee till now.
My youngest boy, and yetmy eldest care,
At eighteen years becameinquisitive
After his brother: andimportuned me
That his attendant--so hiscase was like,
Reft of his brother, butretain'd his name--
Might bear him company inthe quest of him:
Whom whilst I labour'd ofa love to see,
I hazarded the loss ofwhom I loved.
Five summers have I spentin furthest Greece,
Roaming clean through thebounds of Asia,
And, coasting homeward,came to Ephesus;
Hopeless to find, yetloath to leave unsought
Or that or any place thatharbours men.
But here must end thestory of my life;
And happy were I in mytimely death,
Could all my travelswarrant me they live.
Hapless AEgeon, whom thefates have mark'd
To bear the extremity ofdire mishap!
Now, trust me, were it notagainst our laws,
Against my crown, my oath,my dignity,
Which princes, would they,may not disannul,
My soul would sue asadvocate for thee.
But, though thou artadjudged to the death
And passed sentence maynot be recall'd
But to our honour's greatdisparagement,
Yet I will favour thee inwhat I can.
Therefore, merchant, I'lllimit thee this day
To seek thy life bybeneficial help:
Try all the friends thouhast in Ephesus;
Beg thou, or borrow, tomake up the sum,
And live; if no, then thouart doom'd to die.
Gaoler, take him to thycustody.
I will, my lord.
Hopeless and helpless dothAEgeon wend,
But to procrastinate hislifeless end.
(clock chimes)
Therefore give out you areof Epidamnum,
Lest that your goods toosoon be confiscate.
This very day a Syracusianmerchant
Is apprehended for arrivalhere;
And not being able to buyout his life
According to the statuteof the town,
Dies ere the weary sun setin the west.
There is your money that Ihad to keep.
Go bear it to the Centaur,where we host,
And stay there, Dromio,till I come to thee.
Within this hour it willbe dinner-time:
Till that, I'll view themanners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gazeupon the buildings,
And then return and sleepwithin mine inn,
For with long travel I amstiff and weary.
Get thee away.
Many a man would take youat your word,
And go indeed, having sogood a mean.
A trusty villain, sir,that very oft,
When I am dull with careand melancholy,
Lightens my humour withhis merry jests.
What, will you walk withme about the town,
And then go to my inn anddine with me?
I am invited, sir, tocertain merchants,
Of whom I hope to makemuch benefit;
I crave your pardon. Soonat five o'clock,
Please you, I'll meet withyou upon the mart
And afterward consort youtill bed-time:
My present business callsme from you now.
Farewell till then: I willgo lose myself
And wander up and down toview the city.
Sir, I commend you to yourown content.
He that commends me tomine own content
Commends me to the thing Icannot get.
I to the world am like adrop of water
That in the ocean seeksanother drop,
Who, falling there to findhis fellow forth,
Unseen, inquisitive,confounds himself:
So I, to find a mother anda brother,
In quest of them, unhappy,lose myself.
Here comes the almanac ofmy true date.
What now? how chance thouart return'd so soon?
Return'd so soon! ratherapproach'd too late:
The capon burns, the pigfalls from the spit,
The clock hath struckentwelve upon the bell;
My mistress made it oneupon my cheek:
She is so hot because themeat is cold;
The meat is cold becauseyou come not home;
You come not home becauseyou have no stomach;
You have no stomach havingbroke your fast;
But we that know what 'tisto fast and pray
Are penitent for yourdefault to-day.
Stop in your wind, sir:tell me this, I pray:
Where have you left themoney that I gave you?
O,--sixpence, that I hado' Wednesday last
To pay the saddler for mymistress' crupper?
The saddler had it, sir; Ikept it not.
I am not in a sportivehumour now:
Tell me, and dally not,where is the money?
We being strangers here,how darest thou trust
So great a charge fromthine own custody?
I pray you, air, as yousit at dinner:
I from my mistress come toyou in post;
If I return, I shall bepost indeed,
For she will score yourfault upon my pate.
Methinks your maw, likemine, should be your clock,
And strike you homewithout a messenger.
Come, Dromio, come, thesejests are out of season;
Reserve them till amerrier hour than this.
Where is the gold I gavein charge to thee?
To me, sir? why, you gaveno gold to me.
Come on, sir knave, havedone your foolishness,
And tell me how thou hastdisposed thy charge.
My charge was but to fetchyou from the mart
Home to your house, thePhoenix, sir, to dinner:
My mistress and her sisterstays for you.
Now, as I am a Christian,answer me
In what safe place youhave bestow'd my money,
Or I shall break thatmerry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks whenI am undisposed:
Where is the thousandmarks thou hadst of me?
I have some marks of yoursupon my pate,
Some of my mistress' marksupon my shoulders,
But not a thousand marksbetween you both.
If I should pay yourworship those again,
Perchance you will notbear them patiently.
Thy mistress' marks? whatmistress, slave, hast thou?
Your worship's wife, mymistress at the Phoenix;
She that doth fast tillyou come home to dinner,
And prays that you willhie you home to dinner.
What, wilt thou flout methus unto my face,
Being forbid? There, takeyou that, sir knave.
What mean you, sir? forGod's sake, hold your hands!
Nay, and you will not,sir, I'll take my heels.
Upon my life, by somedevice or other
The villain is o'er-raughtof all my money.
They say this town is fullof cozenage,
As, nimble jugglers thatdeceive the eye,
Dark-working sorcerersthat change the mind,
Soul-killing witches thatdeform the body,
Disguised cheaters,prating mountebanks,
And many such-likeliberties of sin:
If it prove so, I will begone the sooner.
I'll to the Centaur, to goseek this slave:
I greatly fear my money isnot safe.